README.md, before:

# steam-on-demand

Controller-activated Steam gaming on NixOS with gamescope session and GPU-based configuration.

## Features

- **Controller activation** - Auto-start Steam session via udev when controllers connect
- **Display manager integration** - SDDM with Wayland and gamescope session
- **Dedicated user** - Separate user account with autologin for Steam
- **GPU configuration** - Generation-aware settings for AMD and Nvidia GPUs
- **Compatibility tools** - Declarative Proton version control via extraCompatPackages
- **Boot options** - Choose between on-demand activation or auto-start at boot

## Quick Start

```nix
{
  inputs.steam-on-demand.url = "github:yourname/steam-on-demand";
  
  outputs = { nixpkgs, steam-on-demand, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations.gaming = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      modules = [
        steam-on-demand.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.steam-on-demand = {
            enable = true;
            gpu = {
              vendor = "amd";
              generation = "rdna3";
            };
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

## Configuration Reference

### Core Options

```nix
services.steam-on-demand = {
  enable = false;                    # Enable module
  user = "gamer";                    # Dedicated isolation user
  bootToBigPicture = false;          # Boot directly to Steam Big Picture (default: false)
};
```

**Boot behavior:**
- `bootToBigPicture = false` (default): System boots to `multi-user.target`, Steam starts only when controller connects
- `bootToBigPicture = true`: System boots to `graphical.target`, Steam Big Picture starts automatically at boot

### Controller Activation

```nix
activation = {
  controllers = [                    # Controller names triggering service
    "Xbox Wireless Controller"
    "Wireless Controller"            # PlayStation
    "Steam Deck Controller"
  ];
  stopOnDisconnect = false;          # Stop service on disconnect
};
```

**How it works:**
When a controller connects, udev triggers the display manager service which starts a gamescope session with the configured user automatically logged in. If `bootToBigPicture` is enabled, the display manager starts at boot instead of waiting for controller activation.

**Finding controller names:**
```bash
# Connect controller, then:
udevadm monitor --subsystem-match=input --property | grep 'NAME='
```

### Gamescope Configuration

```nix
gamescope.args = ["-e" "-f"];        # Default: []
steam.args = [];                     # Default: []
```

**Common configurations:**

```nix
# FSR upscaling (1080p → 1440p)
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "-w" "1920" "-h" "1080"            # Game resolution
  "-W" "2560" "-H" "1440"            # Output resolution
  "-F" "fsr"                         # FSR upscaling
  "--fsr-sharpness" "2"              # Sharpness level (0-20)
];

# VRR + framerate limit
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "--adaptive-sync"                  # Enable VRR
  "-r" "144"                         # Framerate cap
];

# HDR (requires HDR display + kernel 6.8+)
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "--hdr-enabled"
  "--hdr-itm-enable"
];

# Steam arguments (e.g., force Big Picture)
steam.args = ["-bigpicture"];
```

**Display manager:**
- Uses SDDM with Wayland
- Autologin enabled for gaming user
- Gamescope session runs as default session

### Remote Play

```nix
remotePlay = {
  enable = false;                    # Enable Steam Remote Play
  openFirewall = true;               # Open required ports
};
```

### GPU Configuration

```nix
gpu = {
  vendor = "amd";                    # "amd" | "nvidia" | "intel"
  generation = "rdna3";              # See generation table below
};
```

**AMD Generations:**
- `rdna2` - RX 6000 series
- `rdna3` - RX 7000 series  
- `rdna4` - RX 9000 series

**Nvidia Generations:**
- `rtx20` - RTX 20 series (Turing)
- `rtx30` - RTX 30 series (Ampere)
- `rtx40` - RTX 40 series (Ada)
- `rtx50` - RTX 50 series (Blackwell)

**Auto-applied optimizations by generation:**

| Generation | Driver | Optimizations |
|------------|--------|---------------|
| RDNA2 | RADV | Force RADV, VRS recommended |
| RDNA3 | RADV | Force RADV, VRS artifact fix |
| RDNA4 | RADV | Force RADV, Mesa 25.1+ required |
| RTX 20 | Proprietary | Manual power management |
| RTX 30 | Open | Auto RTD3, threaded optimization |
| RTX 40 | Open | Auto RTD3, threaded optimization |
| RTX 50 | Open (required) | Driver 570+ required |

### Compatibility Tools

```nix
extraCompatPackages = [];            # Default: []

# Example: Install Proton-GE from nixpkgs
extraCompatPackages = with pkgs; [
  proton-ge-bin
];
```

Packages are automatically managed by `programs.steam.extraCompatPackages`.

## How It Works

### Dedicated User

Steam runs as dedicated `gamer` user with:
- Separate home directory (`/home/gamer/`)
- Automatic login via display manager
- FHS environment via `programs.steam`

### Controller Activation

Udev rules trigger display manager:
```bash
# Controller connects → systemctl start display-manager
# SDDM starts with Wayland
# Gamer user automatically logs in
# Steam gamescope session starts as default session
# Controller disconnects → optional session termination
```

### Display Manager

- **SDDM**: Display manager with Wayland support
- **Autologin**: Gamer user logs in automatically
- **Default Session**: "steam" session via `programs.steam.gamescopeSession`
- **Gamescope**: Wayland compositor running Steam
- **Boot Target**: `multi-user.target` by default (on-demand), `graphical.target` if `bootToBigPicture` enabled

### GPU Configuration

GPU vendor + generation determines:
- Driver selection (Nvidia open vs proprietary)
- Session environment variables (`AMD_VULKAN_ICD`, `RADV_DEBUG`)
- Required package versions (Mesa 25.1+ for RDNA4)
- Assertions (RTX 50 requires open driver)

## Project Status

**Stable:**
- Controller activation via udev
- Display manager integration (SDDM + Wayland + gamescope)
- GPU-based configuration (AMD/Nvidia)
- Boot target control

**Experimental:**
- RDNA4 support (Mesa 25.1+ maturing through 2025)

## License

MIT

## Credits

Built on excellent work from:
- [nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs) - FHS Steam support, gamescope session
- [Jovian-NixOS](https://github.com/Jovian-Experiments/Jovian-NixOS) - Steam Deck inspiration

Commit message:

Add security module with power management prevention
Introduce dedicated security module to prevent the gaming user from executing system power management actions (poweroff, reboot, suspend, hibernate) from within the Steam session using polkit rules. Enabled by default to prevent accidental shutdowns.

README.md, after:

# steam-on-demand

Controller-activated Steam gaming on NixOS with gamescope session and GPU-based configuration.

## Features

- **Controller activation** - Auto-start Steam session via udev when controllers connect
- **Display manager integration** - SDDM with Wayland and gamescope session
- **Dedicated user** - Separate user account with autologin for Steam
- **GPU configuration** - Generation-aware settings for AMD and Nvidia GPUs
- **Compatibility tools** - Declarative Proton version control via extraCompatPackages
- **Boot options** - Choose between on-demand activation or auto-start at boot

## Quick Start

```nix
{
  inputs.steam-on-demand.url = "github:yourname/steam-on-demand";
  
  outputs = { nixpkgs, steam-on-demand, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations.gaming = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      modules = [
        steam-on-demand.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.steam-on-demand = {
            enable = true;
            gpu = {
              vendor = "amd";
              generation = "rdna3";
            };
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

## Configuration Reference

### Core Options

```nix
services.steam-on-demand = {
  enable = false;                    # Enable module
  user = "gamer";                    # Dedicated isolation user
  bootToBigPicture = false;          # Boot directly to Steam Big Picture (default: false)
};
```

**Boot behavior:**
- `bootToBigPicture = false` (default): System boots to `multi-user.target`, Steam starts only when controller connects
- `bootToBigPicture = true`: System boots to `graphical.target`, Steam Big Picture starts automatically at boot

### Controller Activation

```nix
activation = {
  controllers = [                    # Controller names triggering service
    "Xbox Wireless Controller"
    "Wireless Controller"            # PlayStation
    "Steam Deck Controller"
  ];
  stopOnDisconnect = false;          # Stop service on disconnect
};
```

**How it works:**
When a controller connects, udev triggers the display manager service which starts a gamescope session with the configured user automatically logged in. If `bootToBigPicture` is enabled, the display manager starts at boot instead of waiting for controller activation.

**Finding controller names:**
```bash
# Connect controller, then:
udevadm monitor --subsystem-match=input --property | grep 'NAME='
```

### Security

```nix
security = {
  preventPowerManagement = true;     # Prevent gaming user from system power actions (default: true)
};
```

When enabled (default), polkit rules prevent the gaming user from powering off, rebooting, suspending, or hibernating the system from within the Steam session. This prevents accidental shutdowns while maintaining administrative control.

### Gamescope Configuration

```nix
gamescope.args = ["-e" "-f"];        # Default: []
steam.args = [];                     # Default: []
```

**Common configurations:**

```nix
# FSR upscaling (1080p → 1440p)
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "-w" "1920" "-h" "1080"            # Game resolution
  "-W" "2560" "-H" "1440"            # Output resolution
  "-F" "fsr"                         # FSR upscaling
  "--fsr-sharpness" "2"              # Sharpness level (0-20)
];

# VRR + framerate limit
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "--adaptive-sync"                  # Enable VRR
  "-r" "144"                         # Framerate cap
];

# HDR (requires HDR display + kernel 6.8+)
gamescope.args = [
  "-e" "-f"
  "--hdr-enabled"
  "--hdr-itm-enable"
];

# Steam arguments (e.g., force Big Picture)
steam.args = ["-bigpicture"];
```

**Display manager:**
- Uses SDDM with Wayland
- Autologin enabled for gaming user
- Gamescope session runs as default session

### Remote Play

```nix
remotePlay = {
  enable = false;                    # Enable Steam Remote Play
  openFirewall = true;               # Open required ports
};
```

### GPU Configuration

```nix
gpu = {
  vendor = "amd";                    # "amd" | "nvidia" | "intel"
  generation = "rdna3";              # See generation table below
};
```

**AMD Generations:**
- `rdna2` - RX 6000 series
- `rdna3` - RX 7000 series  
- `rdna4` - RX 9000 series

**Nvidia Generations:**
- `rtx20` - RTX 20 series (Turing)
- `rtx30` - RTX 30 series (Ampere)
- `rtx40` - RTX 40 series (Ada)
- `rtx50` - RTX 50 series (Blackwell)

**Auto-applied optimizations by generation:**

| Generation | Driver | Optimizations |
|------------|--------|---------------|
| RDNA2 | RADV | Force RADV, VRS recommended |
| RDNA3 | RADV | Force RADV, VRS artifact fix |
| RDNA4 | RADV | Force RADV, Mesa 25.1+ required |
| RTX 20 | Proprietary | Manual power management |
| RTX 30 | Open | Auto RTD3, threaded optimization |
| RTX 40 | Open | Auto RTD3, threaded optimization |
| RTX 50 | Open (required) | Driver 570+ required |

### Compatibility Tools

```nix
extraCompatPackages = [];            # Default: []

# Example: Install Proton-GE from nixpkgs
extraCompatPackages = with pkgs; [
  proton-ge-bin
];
```

Packages are automatically managed by `programs.steam.extraCompatPackages`.

## How It Works

### Dedicated User

Steam runs as dedicated `gamer` user with:
- Separate home directory (`/home/gamer/`)
- Automatic login via display manager
- FHS environment via `programs.steam`

### Controller Activation

Udev rules trigger display manager:
```bash
# Controller connects → systemctl start display-manager
# SDDM starts with Wayland
# Gamer user automatically logs in
# Steam gamescope session starts as default session
# Controller disconnects → optional session termination
```

### Display Manager

- **SDDM**: Display manager with Wayland support
- **Autologin**: Gamer user logs in automatically
- **Default Session**: "steam" session via `programs.steam.gamescopeSession`
- **Gamescope**: Wayland compositor running Steam
- **Boot Target**: `multi-user.target` by default (on-demand), `graphical.target` if `bootToBigPicture` enabled

### GPU Configuration

GPU vendor + generation determines:
- Driver selection (Nvidia open vs proprietary)
- Session environment variables (`AMD_VULKAN_ICD`, `RADV_DEBUG`)
- Required package versions (Mesa 25.1+ for RDNA4)
- Assertions (RTX 50 requires open driver)

## Project Status

**Stable:**
- Controller activation via udev
- Display manager integration (SDDM + Wayland + gamescope)
- GPU-based configuration (AMD/Nvidia)
- Boot target control

**Experimental:**
- RDNA4 support (Mesa 25.1+ maturing through 2025)

## License

MIT

## Credits

Built on excellent work from:
- [nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs) - FHS Steam support, gamescope session
- [Jovian-NixOS](https://github.com/Jovian-Experiments/Jovian-NixOS) - Steam Deck inspiration
